The Project Gutenberg eBook of Little Pilgrim at Aunt Lou's, by
Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Little Pilgrim at Aunt Lou's

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 24, 2022 [eBook #67918]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE PILGRIM AT AUNT
LOU'S ***





[Illustration: Little Pilgrim at Aunt Lou’s.--frontispiece.

Bessie was seated on the barn-floor, with all the little kittens in her
lap.

p. 21.]




  _The Little Pilgrim Series._

  Little Pilgrim
  At Aunt Lou’s.


  PHILADELPHIA:
  AMERICAN SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION,
  No. 1122 CHESTNUT STREET.

  New York: Nos. 8 and 10 Bible House, Astor Place.
  Chicago: 73 Randolph Street.




  _Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1879, by the
  AMERICAN SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION,
  In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington._




LITTLE PILGRIM AT AUNT LOU’S.




I.


It was a long time after Christmas, and the snow and ice had all
melted, and the trees were green again, and the flowers and birds had
all come back.

Summer was just beginning again; and on the very day that she was five
years old the little pilgrim started on a long journey with papa and
mamma and Aunt Lillie.

They were going into the country to Aunt Lou’s, to stay for a great
many weeks--mamma and Aunt Lillie and Bessie; and papa was going to
take them there and stay one night, and then go home again, because he
had to attend to his business.

Grandpapa was not going at all now, because he could not leave his
church and his poor people; but by and by, he said, when the days and
nights were both too hot for him, he would take a vacation like the
school-children, and go to Aunt Lou’s for a month.

Rosy and Jane had promised to take good care of the house, and they
both stood at the gate watching the family off.

At first the little pilgrim thought it very fine to go off in the
steam-cars and watch the houses and trees fly past the windows, for
this is what they seemed to do; but the cars did the flying, while the
houses and trees stayed just where they were before.

There was not a happier little girl to be found that morning than
Bessie. She had a beautiful little trunk with her that held all
Blanche’s clothes, and the key of the trunk was on a ribbon around her
neck. Blanche, you know, was her best dolly--the one her mamma gave her
on her last birthday--and she had always taken great care of her, so
that she was now almost as good as new.

When mamma began to pack the trunks her little daughter brought nearly
every plaything she had to be packed too, for she seemed to think that
everything she had must go with her to Aunt Lou’s. But mamma told her
that there was not room for all her toys, and that she must choose a
few things to take with her, and leave the rest.

Bessie was very much puzzled what to choose, and which of her dollies
to leave behind. She was afraid that if she took Blanche, Sarah Jane
would feel badly; and if she took Sarah Jane, Blanche would not like to
be left behind.

So she went to ask Aunt Lillie about it.

“Auntie,” said she, “s’pose you had two little chillens, and your mamma
would only let you have one chillen to take away, would you choose
Blanche or Sarah Jane?”

“I think,” said Aunt Lillie, who looked very smiling, “that I should
have to take the child who needed me most.”

“That’s Blanche,” said Bessie, who wanted to take her all the time,
because she was so much handsomer than Sarah Jane; “she’s the youngest,
and I have to be careful of her clothes.”

So, trying to explain it all to Sarah Jane why she was to be left at
home, she began to get Blanche ready for the visit at Aunt Lou’s.

When the little trunk came, with Blanche’s name painted on one end,
Bessie was very much delighted; and the tiny dresses and aprons and
petticoats were packed in it very neatly.

Miss Blanche had a new travelling suit that Aunt Lillie made for her.
It was gray, trimmed with blue; and there was a turban hat with a blue
feather in it. Bessie said that Sarah Jane looked very cross when she
saw this, but she told her that it was not right to be jealous of her
sister.

Papa’s eyes laughed when he asked his little girl if he should not get
a check for Blanche’s trunk and have it taken away by the expressman
with the other baggage; and Bessie thought she would like this very
much, until Aunt Lillie said that it would not do, because the little
trunk might get crushed under the heavy ones.

When they went into the cars papa was carrying Blanche’s trunk in one
hand, and holding Bessie by the other, and the little pilgrim herself
was carrying Blanche.




II.


It was night when they got to Aunt Lou’s, and Bessie was fast asleep.
She did not even wake up when she was being undressed, and she did not
know where she was until next morning.

When she woke the sun was shining right in her eyes, and she was not in
her crib, nor in her little blue room at all. There were funny noises
outside too; roosters were crowing, and she heard cows, and then she
knew in a minute that this must be Aunt Lou’s.

No one was in the room with her, for papa had to go off early in the
cars, and mamma had gone down stairs to eat breakfast with him.

Pretty soon Aunt Lillie came in and dressed her; and by that time the
little pilgrim was quite ready for her breakfast.

How the little cousins hugged and kissed her when she came down
stairs! They were so very glad to see her, and they had been allowed to
sit up the night before on purpose to welcome her, and had been very
much disappointed to find that she was fast asleep.

The oldest of these cousins was a boy--a very big boy, Bessie thought,
for he was ten years old. His name was Jimmie, and he liked to read
better than he liked to play, but he would play with them sometimes.

Nellie was a very nice cousin indeed. She was eight years old, and she
was always pleasant and smiling and ready to amuse the little ones.

One of these little ones was Charlie, who had another name, and I am
sorry to say that this was “Cry-Baby.” Charlie was four years old, and
he cried when his face was washed, and cried when he tumbled down, and
cried when he couldn’t have what he wanted.

When he was not crying he smiled and looked like a very happy little
boy; and this was the way he looked now.

Then there was Baby Alice, a dear little girl who had to be carried and
who could not speak a word yet.

Mr. and Mrs. Mason, who were Bessie’s Uncle Ralph and Aunt Lou, lived
on a large farm, where they had plenty of people to help do the work;
and these people had houses of their own not very far from the large
house in which Bessie’s cousins lived.

There were a great many fields around the house, and woods, and a
pretty little brook that seemed to be singing a song the whole time.
The place was called “Brook Farm;” and there were so many horses, and
cows, and sheep, and pigs, and chickens that Bessie wondered if any one
could count them.

“Eat your breakfast, dear,” said Aunt Lou when she saw that Bessie
left her bread-and-milk to look at the pets her cousins were already
bringing in to show her, for they had all had their breakfasts; “there
will be plenty of time for all that afterward.”

But the little pilgrim could not stop long to eat. Charlie had just
whispered, “Tree tittens--four, five, tree--tome and see!” and away she
flew.

“I expect my little girl to run wild now,” said mamma, smiling.

“It will do her a great deal of good,” replied Aunt Lou; “she is
looking too pale, and I want to see her cheeks like roses before she
leaves here.”

In a few moments there was a great screaming and boo-hoo-ing from
Charlie, who came running to the house crying as hard as he could.

“What is the matter now?” asked his mamma, who did not seem to think
there was much the matter.

Then Charlie roared harder than ever, and held up a little fat hand
to show a great scratch on it. Pussy had scratched him because he was
taking her babies up by the tail.

“He is real naughty,” said Nellie, who had followed him; “he makes the
little kittens squeal, and that is why Pussy scratches him.”

Charlie fairly bellowed now, because his scratch hurt him and because
he could not do as he liked with the kittens. He had been sick a great
deal, and had had his own way too much.

Aunt Lillie put a piece of thin plaster on the scratch, and then
Charlie said, “All well now,” and ran back to the barn with his face
full of smiles. His mamma thought he had been punished enough, for
Pussy gave him a pretty hard scratch, and he promised to be very gentle
with the kittens.

Bessie was seated on the barn-floor with all the little kittens in her
lap, and Mother Puss was purring around her and not minding it at all.
They were such pretty little things--white, with black tails, and they
all had blue eyes! They had just got their eyes open.

“Here is some milk for you, Pussy,” said Martha as she put a large dish
of it down on the floor. Martha was the girl who took care of the milk
and butter, that were kept in a little house half sunk in the ground.
This was the dairy.

Pussy did not like to leave her kittens long, even to get something
to eat, and Martha often brought her milk, so that she would not be
hungry.

“Come with me,” said Martha to the children, “and I will show you some
babies smaller than these kittens; I found them yesterday.”

The kittens were quickly put back into their straw nest in the manger,
and the children followed Martha to see what she had to show them.

She took them into the corn-crib, which was near the barn; and where
the corn was all kept with which the animals were fed. In a dark
corner, right under a sloping beam, there was an old box, and in this
box there was a funny sort of nest made of straw and rags.

“Are they birds?” asked Nellie as she tiptoed up to it.

“Birds!” repeated Jimmie, who was just behind her: “don’t you know
better than that? They are mice--white mice, I shouldn’t wonder.”

“No, they ain’t,” said Bessie, who was stretching her little neck to
get a good view of them; “they’re all pink. I see ’em!”

She did not know why she was laughed at, for they certainly were
pink--very pink indeed, and very little.

“La, child!” said Martha, laughing too, “that ain’t the color they’re
going to be. They’re pink because they haven’t got any fur yet, only
their skins. I guess, though, that they’ll be just mouse-color. But
ain’t they cunning?”

“Me want one,” said Charlie, “to play with.”

And when they told him that he could not take any of Mrs. Mouse’s
children, as she had only gone out for a little while, he, as usual,
began to cry.

“Go ahead, Cry-Baby!” said Jimmie; and Charlie did go ahead.

But something dreadful happened just then.

No one knew that Mrs. Puss had just followed them in to see what was
going on; and as soon as she caught sight of the nest with three little
mice in it, she knew what they were in a minute. She made one jump and
gobbled them up; every little mouse was gone, and Puss sat licking her
chops and feeling that she had made a very good breakfast.

“Well, I never!” said Martha, almost out of breath with surprise.

“You horrid cat!” said Nellie, just ready to cry for the fate of the
poor little mice.

Bessie quite cried, it seemed so dreadful; and as to Charlie, his roars
were heard at the house.

Aunt Lou and Bessie’s mamma and Aunt Lillie all came running out to see
what was the matter. Had Charlie’s eyes been scratched out now?

“Oh, mamma!” sobbed Bessie as she buried her head in her mother’s
dress, “that wicked cat has eaten up the little mouses!”

“Do have her killed, mamma,” said Nellie; “she is too bad to live.”

Every little face looked angry and excited, and Charlie kept on
screaming.

Then Martha told about the little nest with the three pink mice in it,
and how Puss had eaten them for her breakfast.

“I wish the cow or something big would eat her kittens,” said Jimmie;
“see how she would like that!”

“Children,” said Aunt Lou, “you are all wrong, and Puss is not wicked
at all. She was born to eat mice--that is her business; and I am sure
that papa will be very much obliged to her for clearing a nest of these
destructive little creatures out of his corn-crib.”

“But they were so cunning!” sobbed the children.

“All young animals are ‘cunning,’” replied mamma with a smile, “but we
should not be very comfortable unless some of them were killed. How
would it do to have the house full of mice?”

That did not sound very pleasant, and they began to see that Pussy was
not so bad, after all.

“Besides,” said Jimmie, remembering what he had read, “we eat cows and
sheep and pigs and chickens ourselves, so we are just as bad as Pussy.”

“Come with me, Charlie,” said Aunt Lillie, “and I will show you a
picture-book which I am sure you will like.”

Charlie stopped crying at this promise, and went with his auntie, of
whom he was very fond.

But he and Bessie had a quarrel that same day about this very auntie,
whom Bessie always claimed as her own property. She didn’t see how she
could belong to any one else; and she said to Charlie, “She isn’t your
aunt Lillie; she’s mine.”

“Tain’t!” replied Charlie, beginning to blubber; “it’s mine auntie
Lillie.”

The little pilgrim was so angry at this that she started to run and
ask Aunt Lillie if she wasn’t her very own auntie and no one else’s.
But she went too fast, and before she knew it she was down on her nose.

Auntie happened to come along just in time to pick the little pilgrim
up and comfort her. Then she told the two little cousins how wrong it
was to quarrel, and that she was auntie to both of them.

So the children kissed and made it up, and Charlie promised that he
would try not to be such a cry-baby.




III.


There were so many things to see at Aunt Lou’s that the little pilgrim
lived out of doors nearly all the time.

“You must come and see my baby-house,” said Nelly; and Bessie wondered
if it would be prettier than hers.

It was in a very funny place, for Nellie took her down by the brook;
and there was a hollow in a great tree that had a little table in
it, and two or three rag dollies sitting by the table, and cups and
saucers on it; but the cups and saucers were not like any that Bessie
had ever seen before. They were made of acorns, which Jimmie had cut
out for her, and the cups looked like little thimbles. Fresh grass was
spread down for a carpet, and Nellie told her little cousin that this
was her summer-house.

“You see,” she said, “that I can leave my dollies and all out in the
rain, and it don’t hurt them a bit. I have nicer ones for in-doors,
but I love these just as well, because I can do what I like with
them.--Hold up your head, Polly, but don’t stare so at the company;
haven’t you any manners?”

Bessie looked all around for the little girl, but she did not see any.
Nellie burst out laughing.

“There she is,” said she, pointing to the largest rag doll; “I always
talk to her as if she was alive. It’s real fun. This is her sister,
Martha Jane. She has fits.”

“My rag doll is Sarah Jane,” said the little pilgrim. “What does Martha
Jane have fits for?”

“’Cos she likes ’em,” replied Nellie; “she’d rather have fits than
anything else. But Polly likes measles best.”

This seemed very strange to Bessie, but Nellie was so much older that
she thought she must know.

When they got tired of playing with the baby-house they took off
their shoes and stockings and paddled in the brook. The water was
delightfully cool, and Bessie knew now why the cows like to stand in
the water in warm weather.

There were stepping-stones in the brook, and the two little girls
crossed from one to another, and paddled about as much as they liked.

“It is nicer here than it is at our house,” said Bessie; “we haven’t
got any brook, nor any barn nor corn-crib; and I’m going to ask my papa
to come here to live.”

“Then we could visit every day,” said Nellie; “you could come to see
me, and I could go to see you.”

But when Bessie got back to her home again she forgot all about going
to live at Brook Farm, and was just as well satisfied with grandpapa’s
house as ever.

When they were tired of the brook they put on their shoes and stockings
again and went to look at Martha’s dairy. Martha had said that they
might come and see her make butter.

Bessie liked going into funny little houses, and it was so nice and
cool in the dairy. Everything was so clean and shining, and the tin
milk-pans were bright enough for looking-glasses. Some of them were
full of milk with rich cream on top, and the little visitor was
allowed to skim some of this off in a pitcher for dinner. She liked to
do it very much.

Martha was churning, and she said that the butter had ’most come. She
kept looking into the churn every few minutes; and soon she took out
large yellow lumps and put them on a flat dish.

These lumps were butter, and she washed them very clean in cold water,
and then worked them into shape. She made them into neat-looking pats,
and stamped them with different figures. She let Bessie stamp one with
a wooden rose, and it looked very pretty.

Then Martha gave each of the children a drink of rich buttermilk from
the churn, and they thanked her and went to the house, for it was
nearly dinner-time. When they were not far from the kitchen-door they
knew that Charlie was coming, there was such a terrible screaming.

“Oh, he’s hurt!” said Bessie, looking frightened; “he’s so little, you
know.”

“Pooh!” said Nellie; “I guess he isn’t hurt; he always screams for
nothing.”

It happened that Charlie was hurt this time--pretty badly hurt too, for
a little boy. But it was some time before his mamma knew it, for, as
Nellie said, he always screamed for nothing, and if Aunt Lou had run to
him every time that he screamed she would not have been able to do much
else.

This is the story he told his mamma between his sobs when he had found
her: “Great wicked bumble-bee bited Charlie in his mouf!”

“Let me see the mouth,” said mamma.

Charlie roared afresh with pain, and showed his lip, badly swollen on
the inside. He certainly had been stung, but mamma did not see how the
bee could have got at him there. When she asked her little boy he hung
his head and said that “Charlie bited a little bite out of a napple,
and then the ugly bee bited his mouf;” and then his mamma knew that he
had disobeyed her and gone into the orchard to eat the apples that had
fallen on the ground.

Mamma made her little boy as comfortable as she could, and then she
talked to him about his naughtiness until Charlie felt very sorry and
promised not to disobey again.




IV.


It was a rainy day, and the children could not go out to play by the
brook or in the fields. Bessie’s mamma said that she knew papa would
like to get a letter from his little daughter, so the little daughter
sat down to print one. This was all that Bessie could do in the way of
writing, but she did it pretty well. This is what she wrote, with some
help from mamma:

  “Dear Papa:

 I want to see you very much, for you are the only papa I have got,
 and a great deal nicer than the pigs and chickens and cows. I like
 them very much too. The pigs are funny. Charlie tumbled in one day,
 and the pigs ran into a corner. Aunt Lou said they were frightened at
 Charlie’s screams. He screams when he isn’t hurt. I don’t. Aunt Lou
 says I am a brave little girl, because I fall down and don’t cry.

  From you dear little daughter,

  Bessie.”


Papa was very much pleased indeed with this letter.

Then the little pilgrim wrote one to grandpapa, and grandpapa wrote an
answer to it, and came and brought it himself.

Every one was so glad to see him! and the children soon found that
they had another playmate. Jimmie was named after grandpa, and he
thought that he ought to have him all to himself, but the little girls
would not consent to this. Charlie wanted a “slice of grandpa” too; and
he had to go all over the farm to see all the pets and the brook and
the baby-house. Aunt Lou said that he was not free from the children
except when he was asleep, but grandpapa declared that he did not want
to be free from them.

He said that Bessie had grown half a head; and she certainly looked
like a very chubby, rosy little girl since she had come to stay at Aunt
Lou’s. She drank so much milk and ran about so much in the open air
that she was getting quite strong.

Bessie scarcely thought of Blanche and the little trunk, there were so
many other things to do. But Nellie said she was a beautiful doll, and
that it must be so nice to have a real trunk to put her clothes in; she
wished that her papa would get her one when he went to the city.

Our little pilgrim loved dearly to hunt for eggs.

Once she saw a little bird’s nest with four pretty eggs in it, but she
knew that she must not touch these, for she did not want to make the
little bird-mother unhappy.

Every one loved Bessie, and the children did not like to think of her
ever leaving them. But the time came when she had to go away from Brook
Farm; and, having said good-bye even to the cows and chickens, the
little pilgrim went off again in the cars on her journey home.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE PILGRIM AT AUNT
LOU'S ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
